[protocol] commit-reveal scheme for non-reverted randomness (#123)
onflow/flips: protocol/20230725-commit-reveal.md

Note that this is an inherent behavior of atomic contract platforms where the programming language is able to error and all temporary results of the transaction are not applied to to the state. While this is not a limitation of the programming language or the safe distributed randomness, a contract platform should provide developers with tools to implement a non-revertible usage of randomness. 

## User Benefit

Adding a safe pattern to reveal randomness without the transaction results being reverted unlocks application relying on randomness (for instance the coin toss contract described above). Not providing such pattern pushes developers to rely on risky solutions with possible security flaws.

## Design Proposal

The proposed design is a commit-reveal pattern. 

The solution requires infrastructure changes to provide new data to the transaction execution environment:

 1. a new FVM function that exposes the current block's SoR (more precisely a derived value from the protocol `SoR_A`) to Cadence runtime. Note that `unsafeRandom` only exposes randoms derived from `SoR_A` through a pseudo-random generator (PRG) but not the `SoR_A` itself. 

>  2. a new system core-contract that stores a limited history of SoRs for the past `N` blocks. The new FVM function in (1) is only available to the history contract, and is not available to other non-system transactions. Note that system-transactions in Flow are executed at the end of each block, after all non-system transactions of the block are executed. The proposal suggests to add a new system transaction that adds the current block's `SoR_A` to the SoR history contract (it also removes the oldest block's `SoR_A`). The contract indexes the SoR history by block height. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 2. a new system core-contract that stores a limited history of SoRs for the past `N` blocks. The new FVM function in (1) is only available to the history contract, and is not available to other non-system transactions. Note that system-transactions in Flow are executed at the end of each block, after all non-system transactions of the block are executed. The proposal suggests to change the system transaction so that it also adds the current block's `SoR_A` to the SoR history contract (it also removes the oldest block's `SoR_A`). The contract indexes the SoR history by block height. 
```

there is one system transaction per block, but it has multiple functions/responsibilities

 3. an on-chain implementation of a PRG is required. A PRG is initialized with an SoR and can generate a sequence of random numbers for an application. It's up to the application to use a suitable PRG instance. At least one recommended PRG implementation should be provided as part of the FLIP implementation (precise instance to be determined).

Once the changes above are available, a commit-reveal scheme can be implemented as follows. The coin toss example described [earlier](#motivation) will be used for illustration:

 - when a user submits a bidding transaction, the coin toss contract stores the block height where the bid was made and stores the bid amount on the application contract. This is a commitment by the user to use the SoR at the current block. Note that the current block's `SoR_A` isn't known to the transaction execution environment, and therefore the transaction has no way to inspect the random outcome and predict the coin toss result. The current block's `SoR_A` is only available once added to the history core-contract, which only happens at the end of the block's execution. 

>  - the coin toss contract grants the user a limited window of time (i.e a block height range) to reveal the results and claim any winnings. Failing to do so, the user loses the bid amount in favour of the coin toss contract.  

Reviewer: Might be good to reiterate here that this window is needed because the SoR history contract has a limited view into the past.

Author: Good point, though I think that's the second reason. The primary reason is that the block's SoR will become public and the user can know easily whether they won after the commit transaction. Even if we had unlimited history of SoR, the user may decide to never send the second transaction and never be "charged" the losses. In that case, an expiry window is needed to force "charging" the bet into the application account. Is that correct or am I not understanding how the escrow works?

Either way I'll add a word about the SoR history being limited.

### Performance Implications

- There is no timing and gas impact other then the PRG is being executed on-chain.
- The core-contract will have to store the SoR history for a limited window. For `N` equal to 1200000, the storage size is at least 37Mb (not counting the encoding overhead).

### Dependencies

None

### Engineering Impact

The points 1, 2 and 3 in [the design proposal](#design-proposal) need to be built as part of this proposal.

### Tutorials and Examples

Here is an example of a coin toss contract with one function to commit a bid, and another function to resolve the bid:

```
import SoRHistory from 0xFLOWSORHISTORY

cointossCommit(bet: @FlowToken.Vault) : @Receipt {
		let receipt <- create Receipt(
					betAmount: bet.balance,
					commitBlock: getCurrentBlock().height
		)
		self.reserve.deposit(from: <-bet)
    return <- receipt
}

const let expiryWindowLength = 1000000

cointossReveal(receipt: @Receipt) : @FlowToken.Vault {
		let currentBlock = getCurrentBlock().height
		if receipt.commitBlock >= currentBlock {
			panic("cannot reveal yet")
		}
        if receipt.commitBlock + expiryWindowLength > currentBlock {
            return <-FlowToken.createEmptyVault()

>         }

Reviewer: I have some thoughts about this part.

the window is mainly needed because of the `SoRHistory` history limit. But I think the correct implementation of `SoRHistory.getSoR(atBlock)` should just panic if called for a block to far in the past. I think that makes this check redundant.

I think its also important to point out to the developers applying this pattern that the second call may never come.

Author: The expiry window defined by the application isn't necessary equal to the history window of the core-contract history. It can be smaller if the application wishes, that's why I added that check. I will add a comment to clarify.

Author: I can also remove it if this is not an important detail.

Reviewer: I would maybe mention that a`SoRHistory.getSoR` will panic if called for a block to far in the past, and omit this check from the example, to make it more minimal.

To add to that two things are already omitted from the example pattern that should probably be in the final instructions we put on the doc site, but maybe don't have to be mentioned here:

- instead of collecting the bet into the reserve pool `self.reserve.deposit(from: <-bet)` I would instead have an array of pending rewards: 
    ```cadence
   let potentialWinnings <- self.reserve.withdraw(amount: bet.amount)
   potentialWinnings.deposit(from: bet)
   self.storePotentialWinnings( potentialWinnings, /* somehow not the block and the receipt this was stored for */) 
    ```
  this ensures that the users wont be able to bet so much that they  cannot be payed out. This also ensures that reserve can be emptied without affecting bets that are in flight. And it is also safer to separate the potential user funds out from the big pool.
- prevent bets of minuscule  amounts, to prevent any sort of storage bloating attacks

Author: sounds good, it makes sense to omit the expiry check and clarify the behaviour of `SoRHistory.getSoR`. 

Regarding the two other points, I'm wondering if that's also too detailed. The reason is that this FLIP should be about "how to use randomness in a commit-reveal" rather than "how to design a betting contract". In that sense, I wanted focus on the 2-steps pattern and querying the new core-contract. The coin-toss contract (including bets) is only an example and should not represent all usage of randomness.

		
		let coin = randomCoin(atBlock: receipt.commitBlock, salt: receipt.id)
		destroy receipt

		if coin == 1 {
			return <-FlowToken.createEmptyVault()
		}
		
		return <-self.reserve.withdraw(amount: receipt.betAmount * 2)
}

> fun randomCoin(atBlock: UInt64, salt: [UInt8]) : UInt8 {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fun randomCoin(atBlock: UInt64, salt: UInt64) : UInt8 {
```
